[Applause]
so it's it's a pleasure to give this
lecture and acknowledge bill Stubing
thank you very much for this opportunity
it's also a daunting topic but I chose
it so I'm gonna try to raise the
question and hopefully all of us in the
room will try to help each other answer
the question but of course it's a
question it's very relevant this morning
someone asked me what I did this morning
I'm a stem cell biologist
I'm a cancer geneticist I do transplants
I transplant blood stem cells into human
beings this morning we just looked at
our we have a morning laboratory rounds
and we were looking through last week's
data and realized that we had been using
cord blood stem cells stem cells coming
from umbilical cord blood and we're now
getting routinely 90% genetic changes
deliberately genetic changes in cord
blood stem cells it was unimaginable
six months ago it was unimaginable 12
months ago to get an efficiency of
genetic to engineer human cord blood
stem cells with efficiencies that range
in the 90 to 95 percent range
changing a genetic changing a gene of
interest in treating and remember these
are human cord blood this is not a mouse
experiment these are human cord blood
stem cells if we were to implant these
into human beings they would in graft
they would give rise to the entire
system of human blood getting these
numbers without exogenous agents without
viruses are truly surprising and and
raise fundamental questions about where
this technology is going so in some ways
my day comes through a very weird circle
I wake up in the morning go to the
laboratory see patients and then the
evening I get to think about the things
that I haven't thought about during the
day which is what the hell are we doing
where are we going with all of this and
when what are the landmarks or the
boundaries what is this nation look like
in which an unusual number of
technologies are converging on our
ability to change human genomes so
that's that's my introduction I am NOT
here to give a biology lecture so by
means of introduction we just need some
vocabulary so I'm going to give a little
bit of an introduction but really the
there's a much wider deeper field here
which I'm I'm not going to belabor but
but the field in some ways in a sense
starts with starts here in in the Czech
Republic this is in a city called Bruno
how many of you been to Bruno one two
three five people yeah so this is where
I would make the argument that this is
where biology modern biology begins in
fact it begins right here in this little
garden about the size of this the full
full edge of the stage over here which
is planted peculiarly with gardenias
when in fact several years ago several
hundred years ago it was planted with
peas and here this window over here this
one is the window that we know that
Gregor Mendel this is the room that
Gregor Mendel inhabited and here in this
garden he planted his first set of peas
now people often ask and there's a great
deep there's a lot of history over here
which I'm glossing through people often
ask well what about Mendel was so
important so revolutionary and there are
many many things we know the idea that
ultimately Mendel came to the idea that
there are particulate factors there are
factors that move across generations not
losing themselves not losing information
but being carried in their wholeness
that that Mendel really found but really
Mendel's one of the things that I write
about in the book is that really
Mendel's genius was to mix two
disciplines he mixed mathematics and
biology
people didn't think about biologic
biology mathematically they thought
about biology anatomically they thought
about biology physiologically Mendel was
one of the first to think about biology
as an abstract problem in mathematics
are there are there ratios are there
rhythms are there fundamental constants
ease that ride through the inheritance
of heredity though it's amazing in
retrospect that we think about heredity
this way because the dominant feeling
the dominant idea about what what
heredity was was was an idea that we had
was is a very intuitive idea but an idea
that we inherited from generations past
which is that you know your your nose
looks like some kind of blend between
your mother's nose and your father's
nose your hair the color of your hair
looks some kind of looks like some kind
of blend between your father's hair and
your mother's hair your height and so on
and so forth so intuitively it made a
lot of sense that you were the product
some kind of Waring blender product of
your of your two parents of your father
and your mother and this theory was a
powerful theory and really had stood the
test of time across many thousands of
years before as I said Mendel began to
apply mathematical rules to very simple
ways now the problem is if you think
about it it cannot possibly be true
because if that was true how would you
explain gender if in every generation
the the two features the anatomical
physiological features of your father
and your mother mixed together then how
on earth would you explain the
physiological dichotomy the the
bifurcation of the an anatomy and
physiology it just couldn't possibly be
true there had to be unitary
characteristics moving across
generations and it's an amazing thing if
you think about that it just takes you
one second to take commonplace ideas in
history to figure out that an incredibly
important field could be based on
conjecture and would be wrong and you
could disprove it just based on one
simple idea and
of course was what Manuel did he took an
entire field of history philosophy
biology by fusing it and looking at
mathematics and began to understand as I
said that genes are carried in in
unitary forms that really although he
didn't use the word there's information
that's moving in from one generation to
the other and it doesn't get blended it
really remains constant and this is of
course is Megan himself it's a it's a
it's a reminder to people who practice
in the Academy that man will really
virtually failed every examination that
he ever took so much so that he wasn't
allowed to really be a teacher he could
only be a substitute teacher and and
later in his life so that that's one
reminder and the second great reminder
is that later is life the the only
scientific work that he ever did the
molle important world that he ever did
was in in publishing his important paper
on peas it was read by a it was read by
but we think about a hundred odd people
and then basically vanished for forty
odd years
no one even heard of it talked about it
referred to it and his later life was
taken up with administrative
responsibilities and he never produced
another piece of work in his life so
it's it's a kind of moral warning for
people who who enter who leave the
Academy to do administrative work anyway
it's an important feature of the gene
that the idea of genetic manipulation
and genetic perfectibility occurs not as
a consequence of what Mendel does or
discovers but occurs in parallel with
what Mendel doesn't discovers in other
words the desire to perfect human beings
through genetic means through the means
of controlling heredity is an ancient
desire it's a desire that predates
Mendel and continues beyond mental
what's interesting about it and we'll
talk about this in greater detail Mendel
and the idea of their the existence of
the gene provides a critic
Peace in this because he he and
subsequently others once once we real
once we realize and and fully digest the
idea that the gene is a is carried in a
particulate form that the information
does not get destroyed you also have to
accept that these individual pieces
these units as it were
could be individually manipulated now I
want to emphasize how important that is
because if if the whole thing was a kind
of Waring blender miasma of of of
features blending with each other our
capacity in 2017 to intervene on one
aspect of it leaving the rest of it
untouched would be great a compromise we
would we would be stuck saying God you
know if we if we touch the gene that
controls a terrifying form of cardiac
disease and this was the reference made
earlier what if we also mess up the
genes that control physiology the
development of the brain the fact that
we have five fingers but in fact it is
the it is the very idea that the that
the gene occurs as a unitary object a
unitary part of a material chemical that
allows us in 2017 to make to imagine
intervening on the human genome in a way
that would be otherwise unimaginable if
the gene was mixed up in a way in this
Waring blender way so both these things
are simultaneously true it is
simultaneously true that the desire for
human perfectibility arise as before
modern genetics but it's also true that
modern genetics allows us to bring to
completion the idea of human
perfectibility in a way that wouldn't be
possible had old ideas of genes continue
to exist if there's one point about this
talk that I want to emphasize it's that
both these things are true that there is
both an ancient desire for human
perfectibility and modern technologies
have allowed us to take those ancient
desire
and bring them to a technological place
which would not otherwise be possible
was it not the case that genes were
arranged this way we'll talk more about
this as we move along but going back to
this ancient desire in fact long after
Mendel Mendel was rediscovered in the
1910s and 1920s having mean forgotten
since the 1860s but the but the idea of
human perfectibility was racing along in
the tens and 20s on its own accord this
is a picture of a Nazi scientist
measuring the height of twins trying to
understand the extent to which height is
determined by genetic influences versus
environmental or nutrient influences
this is a this is one of the interesting
pictures from the archives which is in
the book this is another this is a
picture from a Nazi training camp you
can see the swastika on this man's
armband and this would be a typical
picture I mean it took a particularly a
student intern to find this is we a
typical picture it was it came on my on
my desk
except of course if you look very close
by here is the teacher teaching
Mendelian genetics you can see these
little lines this would be a family
history being taught as part of the
education of a young of a young Nazi
recruit but this of course was not only
a Nazi problem this was not a german
problem it is one of the it is one of
the our attempts to airbrush history to
remind ourselves that eugenics the idea
of human perfectibility was something
that was invented and created in the
nineteen nineteen thirties in germany
but of course that's not true the idea
of eugenics was born out of a very
liberal Victorian or post Victorian
ethos Francis Galton who conjured the
name eugenics the eugenics better humans
a better heredity was was part of the of
the great Victorian post Victorian elite
who
thought of himself as a great as someone
who was doing humankind an enormous
favor by helping us and and Golden's
idea was that if you bred people if you
bred the right kind of people at the
right times a kind of numerological
eugenics you would get better human
beings and it was a social function it
was in fact a state-mandated function
that you should do this and this was the
only way that we would get a more
perfectible human race and we will
eliminate terrifying diseases including
mental illnesses so Galton's idea of
eugenics was a an idea of selection but
through better breeding this was a boy
called what he called and what others
later called positive eugenics
but even then so this was in the early
1900's late 18-hundreds and early
nineties the idea began to circulate and
and if you were if an audience like this
if you were part of you know the
Bloomsbury elite as it were or what
would later become the Bloomsbury elite
you would find yourself agree with God
and you would say this is one of the way
is that a state should exert its
influence a country should exert its
influence and make human beings better
but even then that idea doesn't get to
Nazi Germany there's an intermediate
period what I call the adolescence of
eugenics and that of course is in the
United States it's a history we've
effectively buried but but but it's now
emerging as a powerful moment in our
history
it begins among other things with these
better babies contests this is a picture
of of kids being and there's a physician
here and a nurse judging two nurses
three nurses better babies to to
determine who are the best babies for
future selection future representation
it takes form in in these advertisements
that come out in the in popular
newspapers in films in magazines this is
the the the tree of eugenics eugenics is
the self direction of human evolution
and it has all sorts of lovely things
like biology
anthropology statistics medicine etc
converging like roots of a tree allowing
human beings to become you know the
branches that are that are improved
based on these these roots that are
collected my book the gene is dedicated
to carry buck this is Carrie buck Carrie
buck is really the the the the the
person that crystallizes these ideas in
its most macabre form Carrie buck is
deemed to be a genetic imbecile and the
the court mandates that she be
sterilized in order to prevent her from
having any more children as a
consequence of genetic imbecility we now
know and we suspect that that is likely
all nonsense that in fact Carrie buck
had no genetic imbecility she was a
rebel she was she lived outside the
norms of often of society but this is
her with her mother Emma buck who was
also and both of them were confined in a
state held I would now call it a prison
there was then called a sanatorium
and and Carrie buck appealed her case
she appealed her the state's capacity to
sterilize her by removing her ovaries
and she lost the case and the final
judgment that was handed down by none
other than Oliver Wendell Holmes was
three generations of imbeciles is enough
that word enough is a word that should
send a chill up everyone's minds what is
enough where does enough start an end
but nonetheless Carrie buck was taken to
a surgical suite against her will her
belly was cut open and a surgeon was
allowed by state mandate to remove her
two ovaries and so that she would never
have another child again I'm going to
take a swerve away from this far away
from this and talk about the scientific
events that happened in between
so that we can then get to the substance
of the conversation which is with that
history with that back story lurking
behind us
what do we do now what happens next this
is really meant to be a rapid-fire
scientific journey you can read in great
great great detail about it in the Jane
so I won't spend a lot of time but of
course by the 1950s we returned to the
idea while the idea while the idea of
human perfectibility was advancing we
did return to the idea of well what is a
gene what is it made of is it a chemical
what kind of chemical is it and if it's
a chemical can we make changes in it if
we make changes in what kind of changes
should we be able to make that's that's
again a long legacy this is a there's a
structure component to this what is the
structure of that chemical what is a
function of that chemical what does it
do
and because it's a chemical can we
change it
can we change its its chemical nature
and thereby change the heredity the
hereditary information that's passed
around so this is rosalind Franklin I
put this picture in because this was
this is this x-ray crystallographic Ribe
Dazz the most beautiful picture ever
taken in biology of course it is a
picture of the structure of DNA and
Rosslyn was among the first to to take
one of these purchases of course
photograph 51 and I put this in because
we just finished the Nobel Prize season
and Roslyn sadly would died of cancer
before she could even be nominated for
the Nobel Prize for this discovery but
the winners of that prize of course were
Francis Crick and and Jim Watson and
this is the structure of DNA and there's
some historical debate about the extent
to which they used Roslyn's data to make
this to make the structure nonetheless
Jim Watson and Francis Crick were able
to solve that structure of DNA and this
is in fact their first in in their
Cambridge laboratory as young man
as you can see them attempting to build
a sticking ball and stick model off that
structure of DNA and that structure of
DNA is now you many of you know is
extraordinarily simple now that's
important the extraordinary simplicity
was unanticipated it's an
extraordinarily simple structure and it
carries its code the code that makes you
and me or Anatomy or physiology really
in four cardinal molecules which are
then bound together in a chain one chain
having lost you know a reading 8c a GC a
GT and it's reverse complements it's
mirror image reading AC T G C T G again
this is most of you who are biologists
or in medicine know this very well I
won't press the point but if you're not
in the field the important piece is the
important thing to remember is that
these two things these two strands are
really complements of each other they're
mirror images of each other and they're
twined around each other in a double in
the famous double helix and the
information to build a an organism out
of an embryo the information to carry
out the physiology of the embryo is all
carried in this in this pool of
molecules in a sin for letters ACTG so
that if I took your genome which would
be 3 billion odd letters of this ACTG
you actually get 3 billion from 2 pairs
but three billion odd letters of this
ACTG and i would print it out in a
standard dick in a standard printed
format just one person's genome it would
be 72 full sets of the Encyclopedia
Brittanica so you can imagine one set
but 75 or 72 full sets and if you open
one page you know set 16 volume 35 page
342 it would read a CT g c GT t TCG and
so forth that's not real I didn't
memorize it but I'm just making it up
but but that would but that sequence
from that encyclopedia
we now know that from that encyclopedia
a single cell can build a multicellular
organism with all its complexities and
all its many many dimensional
physiologies so the question is how does
it do it how does it do that now that's
a long story there again I'm summarizing
this will seem obvious to most people
who are in the field in medicine and
biology
however again just to get the vocabulary
clear between the 1950s and 1960s the
important realization was that genes
make messages these messages themselves
have aspects of form and function or
they can be further translated into
aspects of form and function and we know
the chemical versions of these this is
the gene is carry in the form of DNA
that gets that gets a copy of that or a
variant of that gets made into RNA
itself has some functions but ultimately
gives rise to proteins and again those
the differences in this function this
output combined with differences in
environments nutrition life fate things
that we call things that we used to
think of is very abstract give rise to a
person that looks like this versus a
person who looks like this this is a 1
basis of the difference but there are
multiple bases of the differences but
but this is an important basis of the
difference we scientists then figured
out the the nature of the code this is
not a code that is hidden to us we now
know exactly what this code looks like
what what the code between RNA and
protein looks like this is Marshall
nirenberg in his laboratory and this is
in fact I know Myrna Weissman who was
Marshalls surviving wife but this is
from this is a courtesy of Maria and
this is Marshalls first it's a picture I
took this is Marshalls first deciphering
of the of the genetic code from his
notebook
one last aspect of this is to remind
ourselves is that the genome is not a
static entity the the genome as I said
to remind ourselves of the analogy of
the metaphor here is that your genome
would be in every single cell would be a
roomful of these Encyclopedia
Britannica's but one cell you're the
cell in your brain uses only one of them
only only some of those pages only read
some of those pages a different cell in
your body a blood cell reads other
pages and by reading different pages
after by reading out different pages off
that static encyclopedia your body can
generate very very different functions
it can generate very different responses
to events and so forth and of course the
no striking example of this is that this
creature has exactly the same genome as
this creature they both have exactly the
same genome and yet the output of the
genome produces a an insect that looks
like this versus another insect that
looks like this and has wings if you
were both of them have exactly the same
Encyclopedia but the but the way that
the Encyclopedia is read the Selective
reading of some pages allows one insect
to look like this another stage to look
like this and yet another station looks
like this so there's a dynamism in in in
genetic information that's important so
that brings us really to the edge of
what what where we are today and and
what we have to discuss today which is
now we're beginning to read and write
the genetic code so until this point of
time until the 1950s we'd begun to
understand it but the moral dimension
the ethical dimension the bio ethical
consequences of what happens really
begin from the 1950s onwards which is
when not having understood the
background we begin to actively read our
code this is Fred Sanger who was on the
first to develop mechanism to read
genetic instructions so instead of that
encyclopedia being in the abstract you
all of a sudden could enumerate you
actually say on page 347 the sequence
reads ACTG DCTC it said etc and and
here's another picture of I think we
considered on the blackboard for a
second this is Bob Swanson her Boyer but
put on the blackboard concentrated on
the idea that in in initially in
bacteria but eventually in all organisms
we could take pieces of genetic code
pieces of genes genes as chemicals and
and move them around from one organism
to another so rather than again this
being a code or a chemical that was
somehow trapped in nature your
encyclopedia is your encyclopedia mine
is my encyclopedia never the twain can
be switched changed altered we began to
understand that at least in simple
organisms you could take a page out from
one of these from the encyclopedia of a
yeast cell and put it in the
encyclopedia of a whale cell just to
give you a somewhat absurd example but
it would be read because it's the same
kind of chemical and the processes
because of evolution the processes
remain constant that's a you might say
in 2017 that doesn't surprise you very
much of course this was extraordinarily
surprising when it occurred and in the
blackboard you know this is the this is
the basis of that moment on the
blackboard here they are taking a gene
from a bacterium and splicing it or
putting it really into the gene in
genome of a virus and it's just the
simple arrow this of course took decades
of work but this simple arrows suggests
that you could just mix and match these
you could tear out one page and put it
into another page and we'd read as if
the Encyclopedia was intact this moment
did not get unnoticed the idea of human
perfectibility and its alternative the
idea that you could also have human
beings that were genetically altered
because if you know if so this is in the
1960s and 1970s technology is far away
from this but the fear really begins to
resonate and again I just remind myself
there's a massive conference held at a
SIL amar I write about this where a
large group of scholars intellectuals
journalists lawyers it was a public
conference came together to ask the
question
okay we're this is in nineteen to 1970s
to us a question okay we've invented
these technologies it's you know we're
starting to read the human genome we're
starting to move swop genetical elements
between between organisms what should we
do should we stop should we put a
moratorium on this capacity students
protested remembering what had happened
from the 1930s this is in Cambridge at a
conference a conference interrupted we
will create the perfect race this is
Paul Berg my mentor at Stanford I still
close friends with him one of the
inventors of this technology whirring in
this room in Asilomar about what would
happen but what's interesting about it
is that most of that meeting because of
technical and technological reasons most
of that meeting was concentrated on the
possibility of biological crises or
biological catastrophe so it was a it
was really as Ilham are ultimately
became a biosafety meeting it did not
become a moral safety meeting of course
by safety is moral safety their
connection between them but by moral
safety I mean what do we do what human
beings what do we do about the future of
human beings Paul and I had a
conversation six months ago and we'll
repeat it in San Francisco where I asked
him on stage I said well Paul why what
was the thought behind that why did why
did it become why was the why was it
that the that the biological dangers the
the the biohazard took precedent over
moral hazard and the answer was they had
they really did not think
in 1970 in the 1970s that this was real
that there is anyway that sorry that the
scenario of intervener
intervening of human genomes in an
embryo and thereby changing human
genomes prospectively it was even
conceivable it was technologically
outside the realm of thinking so fast
forward again and now we come to them to
the sort of the final phase the the
phase that we're living in now and that
begins in 2001 and that begins with the
the draft sequence of the human genome
so now by 2001 the this is Fred Sanger
again this is an older Fred Sanger who
began to show us ways to sequence the
human genome but by 2001 we had a draft
sequence of the human genome not the
entirety but for the most part the that
encyclopedia that I had referred to the
AC T GC CTG etc was was known was a
finite we knew what lived on as I said
page 347 in volume 335 and that was
published in Nature and in science and
of course as many of you know people who
work in the field it's publicly
accessible you can go and download it
you can open it up you can look at not
your own genome but the draft sequence
of some human genomes is fully known you
can log into it you can find what gene
lives on where on that on that on
various chromosomes of the human body so
this was the first real act of reading
the human genome so and by reading I
mean knowing the letters the ACTG
letters that constitute the Encyclopedia
but of course there's a second phase of
reading which is describing meaning we
don't read just by acknowledging letters
that's the first thing we teach our
children when we teach them to read this
letter refers to this sound that letter
refers to that sound but the meaning the
lies behind reading occurs when you
begin to take that information and
transform that in
- meaning and that meaning has now we
are beginning to really access the
meaning of those a CT geez that project
is far from complete but every day we
begin to understand deeper and deeper
meaning behind that sequence of
inscrutable seeming letters so what do
we know what do we know so far what are
the general principles of this reading
capacity well one thing that we know is
that most human dream genes are
controlled by most human traits are
controlled by multiple genes height is a
great example human height we now know
that is control the variation the normal
human variation in height is controlled
by dozens of genes and by and conversely
and perhaps relatedly most human
diseases are similarly polygenic most
common human diseases are polygenic one
important feature is that many and by
many I refer both to traits and to
diseases have genetic links but the
exact genes are unknown they're
obviously outliers in this Huntington's
disease there's one gene and it's
extraordinarily powerful in determining
if it's in if it's one variant the
chances that you will live and die
hunting disease are virtually a hundred
percent
cystic fibrosis is another example in
which if you if you happen to inherit
two mutant copies of that gene chances
that you will have a cystic fibrosis
like disease whether it's a mild version
with a very severe version are nearly a
hundred percent we also have learned and
we refer to this idea before it's in
it's an important realization that genes
although there are dominant influence on
our lives intersect or they are
information readers they compile
information at compile information from
environment and chance now this
statement sounds like a bland truth
genes plus environment plus chance
equals phenotype traits features it's
not a bland truth at all that is in fact
the central truth and many of us are
living and one of the huge projects of
genomics right now is to ascribe feature
for feature
the role of gene-environment and chance
in determining phenotype and that is an
incredibly important project and so as a
consequence because of all this I said
because most human genes are controlled
by multiple genes most human diseases
are polygenic a genetic report card will
give you give us propensity x' but it
will not give us actualities so rather
than rather than there being you know
again to give you an example
Huntington's disease is the chances if
you if you inherit the mutant version of
the Huntington's disease gene gene the
chances that you will have a the disease
in your lifetime are hundred percent in
contrast for most human diseases we now
know most human traits
it is rather a set of propensity is
rather than a definite feature of your
future that was this I call safe zones
genetics these were general principles
that were true we knew human diseases
and human traits were part of multiple
genes that were polygenic but the exact
genes were not known but in the last
five orders so if you think about again
reading and writing reading genes and
writing genes reading being the capacity
to decipher information from the genome
writing referring to the capacity to
intervene and make deliberate changes in
the genome both of these technologies
are changing and that's really where we
are today so I'll give you one example
of something that happened last week
this is the paper published last week in
which the authors use genetic
information alone to predict human
height so on the x-axis is the predicted
height based on genetic information on
the y-axis is actual height based on
genetic information and the trick to
this paper was to unleash deep learning
on the human genome so this is about
several hundred thousands or 2,000
individuals this is now being
generalized to 500,000 individuals on a
bio bank and human beings human eyes our
intelligence our standard ways of
thinking about the world are not
sufficient to predict height it's too
complicated that was very safe because
we could say God you know we understand
that height has a strong genetic
inheritable quality identical twins tend
to be the same height particularly in
the West where they were nutritional
status is equalized if they don't have
diseases and so forth if there's no
great environmental influence if there's
no accident or change in nature so we
lived in a relatively safe zone and that
was the zone of ignorance we said we
cannot predict this it's too complicated
we just opened about 10 or 20 days ago
we opened a new box there by saying ok
maybe human beings can't predict what of
deep learning computational techniques
could predict it and in fact this is
deep learning on 2,000 individuals this
are value people who are statisticians
will know this is 0.64 it's not great
but it's not bad either
and we think based I spoke to the author
of the paper we think the the the
accuracy is within 0.6 centimeters so in
other words forget about asking anything
about family history forget about asking
anything about the individual this just
takes the sequence of a genome and using
deep learning techniques spits out your
predicted height and you get to about
0.6 centimeters of the real height this
is morally complex universe because if
we were to be able to predict this for
unborn children in societies where
height carries a premium if we were to
generalize this across other polygenic
diseases remember we were in a safe zone
we said it's too complicated we can
leave it all alone because it lies in
some kind of weird black box we just put
the black we just open the black box and
inserted it into the human genome there
are skeptics who will say this is an
unusual situation you know height is
very heritable apps
correct others will say okay but what if
you know what if you get too close
enough with other things what if you get
to the risk of cancer what if you get to
the risk of Alzheimer's disease what if
you get the risk of neurological
diseases on one hand diabetes on one
hand you can imagine a new kind of
medicine that would be born out of that
powerful ways to interrogate human
beings predict people's futures on the
other hand what if this enters territory
like height what if it enters the
territory of IQ whatever that measures
what if it enters a sexual orientation
we have just stepped using new arenas
into territory that we what we thought
was so complicated that we would leave
it on its side now this is of course
just the reading part right so this is
just what's happening in reading so just
to finish and summarize that arena
obviously these points should be optimal
to be evident to everyone this has
consequences for virtually every human
disease it has consequences for health
maintenance surveillance and risk as
consequence for insurance and risks risk
sharing people often ask me well what
about insurance and I said well
insurance is a mechanism for risk
sharing if you have it if you're
ignorant about risk you can't have
insurance when you are not ignorant
ignorant about risk if all of a sudden
you're all to be non ignorant about risk
we would not be able to share risk
anymore so the standard mechanisms that
we have insurance would be challenged on
a sidenote these are these are my I'm
revealing my personal political
proclivities I cannot think of a more
strong argument for universal basic
health insurance that in fact one of the
consequences of of the deeper
interrogation of human genetics has to
be that we have to radically equalize
ourselves when we realize that in fact
we're radically unequal there's no other
consequence
so that that is the that is the
so-called reading part of the human
genome and then I'll move on to the
writing part and and and I'll stop I'll
read a section of the book where where
all this is addressed so while we are
reading we're also doing something
called writing and by writing I mean
changing the actual code itself so if
reading involves going to the
encyclopedia and deciphering the nature
of information writing involves going to
page 347 and volume 16 and erasing a
particular set of ACTG and replacing it
with a different different code this is
a an article that I wrote for a magazine
which I would encourage you to read
about Braca one the gene that increases
risk for breast cancer here's a picture
of there's several people involved in
this there are patents and cross patents
and lawsuits going on about who owns
this technology another enter that but
anyway this is jennifer doudna I'm doing
a talk with Jennifer in January and her
a woman who is a lab manager but
Jennifer of course as many of you very
well know is one of the leaders in
inventing technologies to allow us to
change to make deliberate changes in
human genomes this is a cartoon I have
to remind ourselves that this is the
this is not one technology is this a
suite of technologies people somehow
have become obsessed with one enzyme one
gene Kaz nine CRISPR etc but Crispin Kaz
nine are really a suite of technologies
that allow us to begin to think about
making deliberate changes in the human
genome and here's one provocative kind
of deliberate changes you might want to
make on the human genome this is
obviously a cartoon but to delete from a
embryonic cell or an embryonic stem cell
or a sperm cell the bracket1 gene
mutation that increases your risk for
breast cancer
the the part of the point that that I'm
trying to make is is this idea of a
suite of technologies crisper and Kaz 9
our one element of a kind of area of
technologies that are allowing us to
circulate closer and closer and closer
to making deliberate human deliberate
changes in the genomes of humans and in
the genomes of other organisms and and
the the the fact is that these
technologies will only enrich themselves
and deepen themselves with the other two
things that I talked about the writing
the reading and the and the and and and
deep learning techniques that we
understand so the more we read and again
remind us of it's like a child the more
the child reads the more the child
understands the more the child learns to
write himself or herself and all of a
sudden if you see that see this in your
own children they go through a
transitional phase when all of a sudden
language the language that we
communicate with becomes becomes
fundamentally amenable to their own or
own manipulation and I I really like to
press this analogy it's not as if we're
just reading or just writing or just or
just learning it's the fact that these
three things are converging together
allowing us to learn the language of
genetics and genomics and becoming more
and more facile with using them a couple
more slides one is that again to
emphasize these this kind of suite of
technologies here is a cross-section of
a culture cell culture in which cells
that have been genetically modified are
being persuaded using techniques to
become other cells and if you look
closely you might identify what this
cell is this is a sperm cell so this
these are primordial germ line cells
germline stem cells which are being
persuaded to make sperm cells and it
again does not take a much to understand
that you can make changes in these cells
in the cells that produce sperm and eggs
and ultimately if you make changes in
those cells the genetic changes that
you're making will ultimately become
changes in
obviously and once they become changes
in sperm they can therefore be
transmitted not across one generation
but across multiple generations so the
contrast is with the example that I gave
you at the beginning of the talk which
is in my laboratory we work on blood
stem cells blood stem cells if you make
genetic changes in blood stem cells
those cells remain in the person's body
often for the lifetime of that person
but when that person generates another
human being they don't get transmitted
so they are restricted to that human
beings body on the other hand if you
were to make changes in these cells
these primordial germ cells then those
changes would become permanently
imprinted in every single cell of the
person that's born because the sperm
would give rise to every single cell of
the person that's born are a few
exceptions but also then become the
sperm become part of the sperm and the
eggs of that human being by definition
and therefore the changes that you would
make would be permanently imprinted on
the human genome and the final
possibility of course is that we're
getting to a place as part of this suite
of technologies where we're saying God
you know why make all these changes like
what I just said God but why make all of
these changes in in a gene you know
genome that already exists why don't
make the whole thing from scratch it's a
chemical you can string them together
from scratch why don't we make larger
and larger pieces of DNA why don't we
get to the place of time we're making
full chromosomes and make it all from
scratch and so the the questions really
have become can we read the genome
before the embryo is implanted can we
introduce genetic changes before making
sperm and eggs we talked about that and
the answer is yes we can and therefore
can we read and write information into
the embryo by making important
diagnostic decisions in the embryo
before so what what have we decided and
this is where this is the this is the
landscape that that that we'll be
inhabiting right now so as you can
imagine the
the National Academy of Sciences and the
National Academy of Medicine met much
like the Asilomar meeting to make some
decisions about what to do about all of
this and I found this report
extraordinarily important I would
encourage everyone to read it it's
online you can find it online but this
is of course the the bioethical report
that came out of all of this I'm not
going to ask you to read all of this but
but it's important to reflect because
we've already taken this journey in this
talk that that three aspects were
recognized one is that the possibility
and I love this this idea that the
possibility of diminishing the dignity
of human beings is at risk as we move
forward with these technologies the
possibility of restricting respect for
our variety is important and finally the
possibility the lack of humility we
might be we might be engaging in things
that we that have a lack of humility in
moving forward people who are in the
field of bioethics know these principles
very well but it was probably one of the
first times when I think the the
consequences for for human future have
been so stark the the the limitations of
the technologies were also recognized
and have become recognized even in the
last few weeks there have been three or
four attempts in altering genes in
humans whether these are safe whether
they only hit one gene whether they can
by mistake make other genetic
alterations that we don't know of remain
a question but I think it's fair to say
that nothing in principle stops the
field from moving forward I think it's
also fair to say that within the next
ten or years that we will know the
answer to whether we can definitively
make changes in the human genome or
certainly in the genomes of other
organisms I suspect in the next five
years we will be able to quite
definitively talk about making
genetically modified changes deliberate
changes in virtually most organisms
particularly the ones that are involved
in crop and food production in the in
for humans so the National Academy
proposed and I'm gonna and this is gonna
be this is gonna be op and we'll stop
here and this is going to be the the
basis of I think the next few years of
work the National Academy made three
recommendations for the possibility of
human genetic changes many of us I think
including me had thought that the
Academy would say we should stop
we should put a cold we should we should
go back to a colder moment a moment of
reflection in which we say that we are
not allowed to make changes in the human
genome or particularly human embryos but
it was I was personally surprised that
the Academy said in fact it would be
permissible to make changes in the human
genome a permanent change in the human
genome and these were the three
principles it's interesting that they
perhaps they're obvious but in fact I
they're remarkably concordant with the
with the triangle that I proposed in the
in the book in the gene number one is
that we make changes only if the gene of
interest or the gene that we're changing
produces what they call it extraordinary
suffering in fact it's the same word
that I used phrase I used in the book
that in fact extraordinary suffering is
a criteria number two that there's
confidence that the gene in fact causes
the disease the causal confidence
between the link between the gene and
the disease and that no other
justifiable alternative exists and
there's no coercion
so the thought that I will leave you
with as we enter the the Q&A session is
the thought which occurs much must have
occurred to all of you by by now which
is who defines extraordinary suffering
what is the limits of that definition is
is extreme shortness extraordinary
suffering in societies where there's a
primacy placed on height what is the
confidence line that we draw between the
link between a gene and a disease so
let's take the example of Braca one I
mean I was giving a talk like this and a
woman came up to me after the talk to
the family history of Braca one of
breast cancer and ovarian cancer and she
said she would love to eliminate the
bracket one gene from her lineage seems
like there's extraordinary suffering if
you have breast or ovarian cancer but
perhaps is also extraordinary suffering
if you don't and you live under the
shadow of having breast and ovarian
cancer in your future should we where do
we draw that line what if we knew that
there was only a 10 or 20% chance of
having such a disease I've often asked
this question you don't have to answer
it often ask the question to his
audience what if I were to tell you that
your you've sequenced the genome of your
unborn child and that child has a 5%
risk of developing a lethal
neurodegenerative disease how many of
you would choose not to have that child
and what if I switch that number from 5%
15% will it make a change and and and
obviously individuals draw that number
in different ways and finally this idea
of no justifiable alternative and no
coercion sounds quite reasonable sounds
like a reasonable idea but to remind
ourselves that we live at the end of a
history where the the nature of coercion
and the and the nature of what's
justifiable are so linked in with our
aspirations that what is coercive and
what's not coercive often becomes fuzzy
when it becomes real in the world the
the culture around eugenics in the 1920s
and 1930s was a course of culture it's
the culture that took people who were
otherwise supposedly liberal minded
interested in in the in the rights of
individuals and interested in in
understanding the understanding and and
and sympathizing empathizing
with the plights of individuals and yet
the culture was coercive enough that a
state mandate was passed to to move them
into into the into penitentiaries so
someone asked me at the beginning of the
talk you know are we ready to it what's
your answer to the question are we ready
to edit our genomes
the answer is technologically we are
getting closer and closer to doing that
we have devised criteria to try to
restrict our capacity to move forward
whether you agree or disagree with that
criteria is a question that you need to
take up individually and just just to
remind ourselves that this cannot be a
conversation that other people have this
is your genome by definition it is
central to you it is one of the most it
is one of the things that is most
central to who you are
it's stewardship is part of what we have
to have stewardship over and the fact
that this is a conversation that will
resonate very widely across the next 10
years I think is very evident to me I
hopefully evident to everyone so it's a
moment I think to pause and ask the
question should there be deeper criteria
should we stop should there be more than
this that we devise in moving forward as
technologically we get more and more
equipped to change our own genetic
information so we will now have a
conversation thank you very much and
I'll bring my book with me thank you
you